feat: all available kapt options (#5678)
JetBrains/kotlin-web-site: docs/topics/compiler-plugins/kapt.md

</execution>
```

> To configure the mode of annotation processing, set the [`aptMode`](#annotation-processor-configuration) option in

Reviewer: to configure the annotation processing mode?

### CLI

kapt is available as a standalone CLI tool in the binary distribution of the Kotlin compiler.

To run kapt from the command line, use:

```bash
kapt <options> <source files>
```

For example:

```bash
kapt -Kapt-mode=stubsAndApt \
  -Kapt-sources=build/kapt/sources \
  -Kapt-classes=build/kapt/classes \
  -Kapt-stubs=build/kapt/stubs \

>   -Kapt-apclasspath=lib/ap.jar \

Reviewer 2: Sorry, I made a mistake listing cli arguments. The correct cli arguments are `-Kapt-classpath` instead of `-Kapt-apclasspath`, `-Kapt-options` instead of `-Kapt-apOptions`, and `-Kapt-javac-option` instead of `-Kapt-javacOption`.

### CLI

kapt is available as a standalone CLI tool in the binary distribution of the Kotlin compiler.

To run kapt from the command line, use:

```bash
kapt <options> <source files>
```

For example:

```bash
kapt -Kapt-mode=stubsAndApt \
  -Kapt-sources=build/kapt/sources \
  -Kapt-classes=build/kapt/classes \
  -Kapt-stubs=build/kapt/stubs \
  -Kapt-classpath=lib/ap.jar \
  -Kapt-classpath=lib/anotherAp.jar \
  src/main/kotlin
```

> * See the full list of [kapt-specific compiler options](#compiler-options).

Reviewer: this UL looks a bit strange without anything preceding it. 🤔 Do you think we need it or could we just use a regular para?

Author: I think it works pretty well, looking at the whole piece, we start with: "To run kapt from the command line, use: `kapt **<options>** <source files>`", then example with a lot of different options, and then links to option references

Reviewer: 🤔 to me it feels like it's connected to the `for example:` part since the docs usually start with a sentence ending in a colon followed by the list.

So I always read it as: 

> For example:
> 
> * The example
> * See a full list of kapt-specific compiler options
> * Additional info
> 

which makes for a very strange list 🤔

>
{style="note"}

### Enable incremental annotation processing

You can enable incremental annotation processing so that only the changed files are re-processed.

Currently, incremental annotation processing works only if:

* [Incremental compilation](gradle-compilation-and-caches.md#incremental-compilation) is enabled.
* All annotation processors in the build are incremental.

To enable incremental annotation processing, use the `processIncrementally` compiler option:

<tabs group="build-script">
<tab title="Gradle" group-key="kotlin">

> Add `kapt.incremental.apt=true` in your `gradle.properties` file:

Reviewer 2: Turns out, Gradle uses incremental APT by default, unlike Maven, which completely ignore the flag. https://youtrack.jetbrains.com/issue/KT-87757

While the latter is a bug, which needs to fixed, the former kind of contradicts `To enable incremental annotation processing` stated above.

Author: thank you, I reverted the changes for Gradle and added a note for Maven (+ listed as not-supported in the table)

```none
# gradle.properties
kapt.incremental.apt=true
```

</tab>
<tab title="Maven" group-key="maven">

Pass `-Dkapt.incremental.apt=true` as a JVM argument when running Maven:

```bash
mvn compile -Dkapt.incremental.apt=true
```

</tab>
<tab title="CLI" group-key="cli">

Use the `-Kapt-processIncrementally=true` option:

```bash
-Kapt-processIncrementally=true
```

</tab>
</tabs>

## Analyze performance

### Measure the performance of annotation processors

To get performance statistics on the annotation processors execution,
use the [`showProcessorStats`](#diagnostics-and-statistics-options) option. An example output:

```text
Kapt Annotation Processing performance report:
com.example.processor.TestingProcessor: total: 133 ms, init: 36 ms, 2 round(s): 97 ms, 0 ms
com.example.processor.AnotherProcessor: total: 100 ms, init: 6 ms, 1 round(s): 93 ms
```

You can dump this report into a file with the [`dumpProcessorStats`](#diagnostics-and-statistics-options) option.
The following command will run kapt and dump the statistics to the `ap-perf-report.file` file:

```bash
kapt -Kapt-mode=stubsAndApt \

>   -Kapt-apclasspath=processor/build/libs/processor.jar \

Reviewer 2: `-Kapt-apclasspath` -> `-Kapt-classpath`.

kapt.incremental.apt=false
```

> > Currently, incremental annotation processing for kapt is not supported in Maven or CLI.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Currently, incremental annotation processing for kapt isn't supported in Maven or the CLI.
```

> 
{style="note"}

## Analyze performance

kapt provides built-in diagnostics to help you understand annotation processing performance, including per-processor
execution time reports and generated file counts to identify unused processors.

> For more diagnostics options, such as file read history for debugging incremental processing and memory leak detection,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more diagnostic options, such as file read history for debugging incremental processing and memory leak detection,
```

see [Diagnostics and statistics options](#diagnostics-and-statistics-options).

### Measure the performance of annotation processors

To get performance statistics on the annotation processors execution,
use the [`showProcessorStats`](#diagnostics-and-statistics-options) option. An example output:

```text
Kapt Annotation Processing performance report:
com.example.processor.TestingProcessor: total: 133 ms, init: 36 ms, 2 round(s): 97 ms, 0 ms
com.example.processor.AnotherProcessor: total: 100 ms, init: 6 ms, 1 round(s): 93 ms
```

> You can dump this report into a file with the [`dumpProcessorStats`](#diagnostics-and-statistics-options) option.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can dump this report to a file with the [`dumpProcessorStats`](#diagnostics-and-statistics-options) option.
```

Reviewer: Nit: 

tbh both works, but we use "to" in the following sentence, so just to keep it consistent.

For example, the following CLI command runs kapt and dumps the statistics to the `ap-perf-report.file` file:

```bash
kapt -Kapt-mode=stubsAndApt \
  -Kapt-classpath=processor/build/libs/processor.jar \
  -Kapt-dump-processor-stats=ap-perf-report.file \
  sample/src/main/
```

### Track the number of generated files

The kapt plugin can report statistics on the number of generated files for each annotation processor.

This helps track whether any unused annotation processors are included in the build.
You can use the generated report to find modules that trigger unnecessary annotation processors and update the modules to avoid that.

To enable statistics reporting:

1. In your Gradle build file, set the `showProcessorStats` option to `true`:

   ```kotlin
   // build.gradle(.kts)
   kapt {
       showProcessorStats = true
   }
   ```

2. In your `gradle.properties` file, set the `verbose` compiler option to `true`:

>    ```none

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   ```properties
```

Reviewer: afaik we can use `properties` for `gradle.properties` files 🤔

[INFO] org.mapstruct.ap.MappingProcessor: total sources: 2, sources per round: 2, 0, 0
```

> > Currently, tracking the number of generated files with the `showProcessorStats` and `verbose` compiler options is not supported in Maven or CLI.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Currently, tracking the number of generated files with the `showProcessorStats` and `verbose` compiler options isn't supported in Maven or the CLI.
```

>
{style="note"}

## Generate Kotlin sources

kapt can generate Kotlin sources. To do that, write the generated Kotlin source files to the specified directory using
`processingEnv.options["kapt.kotlin.generated"]`. Kotlin source files are then compiled together with the main sources.

> > kapt doesn't support multiple rounds for the generated Kotlin files.

Reviewer: hmm 🤔 this feels a bit ambiguous. 
we can infer the information but could WDYT about making it explicit: 

kapt doesn't support multiple rounds of annotation processing for generated Kotlin source files.

> 
{style="note"}

## Compiler options

### Annotation processor configuration

<table>
    <tr>
        <td>Option</td>
        <td>Description</td>
        <td>How to set up</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td><code>aptMode</code></td>
        <td>
            Controls the execution of kapt workflow stages:
            <list>

>                 <li><code>stubsAndApt</code> generates stubs and run annotation processing (default)</li>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
                <li><code>stubsAndApt</code> generates stubs and runs annotation processing (default)</li>
```

                <li><code>stubs</code> only generates Java stubs from Kotlin</li>
                <li><code>apt</code> only runs annotation processors (assumes stubs already exist)</li>
            </list>
        </td>
        <td>

>             <p><b>Gradle:</b> Not directly available; Gradle runs stubs and apt as separate tasks</p>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            <p><b>Gradle:</b> not directly available; Gradle runs stubs and apt as separate tasks</p>
```

Reviewer: we start with lowercase below - so just for consistency.

                    <![CDATA[
<annotationProcessors>
    <annotationProcessor>com.example.MyProcessor</annotationProcessor>
</annotationProcessors>
                    ]]>
                </code-block>
            <p><b>CLI:</b> <code>-Kapt-processors=com.example.MyProcessor</code></p>
        </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td><code>apOption</code></td>
        <td>Key-value options passed to annotation processors.</td>
        <td>
            <p><b>Gradle:</b></p>
                <code-block lang="kotlin">
                    kapt {
                        arguments {
                            arg("room.schemaLocation", "$projectDir/schemas")
                        }
                    }
                </code-block>
            <p><b>Maven:</b></p>
                <code-block lang="xml">
                    <![CDATA[
<annotationProcessorArgs>
    <annotationProcessorArg>room.schemaLocation=/schemas</annotationProcessorArg>
</annotationProcessorArgs>
                    ]]>
                </code-block>
            <p><b>CLI:</b> <code>-Kapt-options:room.schemaLocation=/schemas</code></p>
        </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td><code>javacOption</code></td>

>         <td>Key-value options passed to Java compiler.</td>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        <td>Key-value options passed to the Java compiler.</td>
```

            <p><b>CLI:</b> <code>-Kapt-classes=build/kapt/classes</code></p>
        </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td><code>stubs</code></td>
        <td>Directory for Java stub files generated from Kotlin sources, used as input to annotation processors.</td>
        <td>
            <p><b>Gradle:</b> managed automatically</p>
            <p><b>Maven:</b> managed automatically</p>
            <p><b>CLI:</b> <code>-Kapt-stubs=build/kapt/stubs</code></p>
        </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td><code>incrementalData</code></td>
        <td>Stores state for incremental builds.</td>
        <td>
            <p><b>Gradle:</b> managed automatically</p>
            <p><b>Maven:</b> currently not supported</p>
            <p><b>CLI:</b> currently not supported</p>
        </td>
    </tr>
</table>

### Behavioral options

<table>
    <tr>
        <td>Option</td>
        <td>Description</td>
        <td>How to set up</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td><code>correctErrorTypes</code></td>
        <td>
            By default, kapt replaces every unknown type (including types for the generated classes) with <code>NonExistentClass</code>.

>             You can enable error type inferring in stubs to replace unresolved error types with types from generated sources.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            You can enable error type interference in stubs to replace unresolved error types with types from generated sources.
```

                    }
                </code-block>
            <p><b>Maven:</b> not available</p>
            <p><b>CLI:</b> <code>-Kapt-strip-metadata=true</code></p>
        </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td><code>verbose</code></td>
        <td>
            Enables verbose kapt logging.
            <p><code>false</code> by default</p>
        </td>
        <td>
            <p><b>Gradle:</b></p>
                <code-block lang="kotlin">
                    # gradle.properties
                    kapt.verbose=true
                </code-block>
            <p><b>Maven:</b> currently not supported</p>
            <p><b>CLI:</b> currently not supported</p>
        </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td><code>infoAsWarnings</code></td>
        <td>
            Promotes info-level kapt messages to warnings.
            <p><code>false</code> by default</p>
        </td>
        <td>
            <p><b>Gradle:</b> not directly available</p>
            <p><b>Maven:</b> currently not supported</p>
            <p><b>CLI:</b> currently not supported</p>
        </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td><code>includeCompileClasspath</code></td>
        <td>

>             Scans compile classpath for annotation processors. Set to <code>false</code> for reproducibility.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            Scans the compile classpath for annotation processors. Set to <code>false</code> for reproducibility.
```

        <td>
            <p><b>Gradle:</b></p>
                <code-block lang="kotlin">
                    kapt {
                        javacOptions {
                            option("-source", "11")
                        }
                    }
                </code-block>
            <p><b>Maven:</b></p>
                <code-block lang="xml">
                    <![CDATA[
<javacOptions>
    <javacOption>-source=11</javacOption>
</javacOptions>
                    ]]>
                </code-block>
            <p><b>CLI:</b> <code>-Kapt-javacOption:-source=11</code></p>
        </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td><code>processIncrementally</code></td>
        <td>Enables incremental annotation processing; only reprocesses files affected by changes.</td>
        <td>
            <p><b>Gradle:</b></p>
                <code-block lang="kotlin">
                    # gradle.properties
                    kapt.incremental.apt=true
                </code-block>
            <p><b>Maven:</b> <code>-Dkapt.incremental.apt=true</code></p>
            <p><b>CLI:</b> <code>-Kapt-processIncrementally=true</code></p>
        </td>
    </tr>
</table>

> `apOption` and `javacOption` compiler options can also accept an encoded map of options.

Reviewer 2: These actually accept key-value entries only. The deprecated `apoptions` and `javacArguments` could accept encoded maps. Seems like a bug to me. https://youtrack.jetbrains.com/issue/KT-87762

Author: Thank you for the clarification, let's just remove the info about the maps for now

}
```

### Output directory options

<table>
    <tr>
        <td>Option</td>
        <td>Description</td>
        <td>How to set up</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td><code>sources</code></td>

>         <td>Directory where annotation processors generate <code>.java</code> source files.</td>

Reviewer 2: `<sourceDirs>` are input roots, not the generated source output directory. Maven computes generated source output internally as `target/generated-sources/kapt/<sourceSet>`.
